Document upcoming metrics features of the Linux SDK (#293)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/linux/linux-custom-metrics.mdx

---
id: linux-custom-metrics
title: Linux Custom Metrics

> sidebar_label: Custom Metrics

Reviewer: Why "Custom"?

For MCU, we've got a guide called "Collecting Device Metrics".
For Android, we're making the distinction between "Builtin Metrics" and "Custom Metrics" (both of which are stored in the `CustomMetrics...` tables, but that's irrelevant to the customer/reader of the doc).

Not sure if we need/want to make the distinction here too. I'm leaning towards "no need" for now at least.

Author: Good point, I also wasn't feeling great about `Custom`

---

import { ProjectMagicLink } from "@site/src/components/ProjectMagicLink";

## Introduction

The `collectd` plugin for `memfaultd` (see [the source
code][source-memfaultd-collectd-plugin]) configures CollectD to regularly upload
collected metrics to Memfault. These metrics:

- Are shown on the [device timeline][docs-timeline].
- Are available for use as [Timeseries][docs-timeseries] or
  [Attributes][docs-attributes] metrics, aggregated across the entire fleet.
- Can be used to create [Metric Charts][docs-metric-charts] and
  [Alerts][docs-alerts].

See [Metrics and Attributes](/docs/platform/metrics) for an introduction to
Memfault terminology related to metrics and to learn how the features you'll set
up here can be accessed in the Memfault Web App.

## Prerequisites

### The `memfaultd` daemon

Follow the [getting-started guide][docs-linux-getting-started] to learn how to
set this up for your device. A key function of `memfaultd` is to correctly

> configure and control CollectD to talk to Memfault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure and control CollectD to upload metrics to Memfault.
```

:::tip

Keep [`meta-memfault-example`][source-yocto-example] open as a reference
implementation. Your integration should look similar to it once you're done
following the steps in this tutorial.

:::

### Dependencies

#### CollectD

> If you're using Yocto, the `meta-oe` layer includes [a recipe for `collectd`],

Reviewer: This link doesn't seem to work?

Author: Oops, I forgot the right-hand side :D

so you may be able to just add `collectd` to your dependencies, e.g. by

> appending it to `IMAGE_INSTALL`.

Reviewer: Maybe mention / link to where this is done in `meta-memfault-example`? (Same for the statsd section below.)

Author: ```
If you're using Yocto, the `meta-oe` layer includes [a recipe for
`collectd`][source-collectd-recipe], so you may be able to just add `collectd`
to your dependencies, e.g. by appending it to `IMAGE_INSTALL`. In our example
project, we've opted for adding it to `MACHINE_ESSENTIAL_EXTRA_RRECOMMENDS` in
[`layer.conf`][source-layer-conf].
```

And:

```
In our example project, we've added StatsD clients as dependencies:

- `statsd-c-client` in our C sample app:
  - See [the corresponding `DEPENDS` addition][source-statsd-c-bb]
  - See a [sample recipe for `statsd-c-client`][source-statsd-c-client-bb]
- `python3-statsd` in our Python sample app:
  - See [the corresponding `DEPENDS` addition][source-statsd-python-bb]
```

[the StatsD plugin][collectd-plugin-statsd]. This will allow you to send
application metrics through to Memfault.

You can find a list of StatsD clients for a diversity of languages [in the
StatsD repository][statsd-clients].

[collectd-plugin-statsd]: https://collectd.org/wiki/index.php/Plugin:StatsD
[statsd-homepage]: https://github.com/statsd/statsd
[statsd-clients]:
  https://github.com/statsd/statsd/blob/master/docs/client_implementations.md

## Configuring CollectD

We strongly recommend familiarizing yourself with [CollectD][collectd-homepage]
and how it's configured in order to make the best use of the Memfault platform.

The `memfaultd` daemon generates a configuration file, by default in
`/tmp/collectd.conf`, with information about the device provided by
[`memfault-device-info`][docs-memfault-device-info] (see the [getting-started
guide][docs-linux-getting-started] for more information). Note that the path
where this configuration file is generated [can be configured in
`/etc/memfaultd.conf`][docs-configuration] using the
`collectd_plugin.output_file` configuration key.

A minimal configuration file to configure CollectD to post to Memfault looks
like this:

```conf

> Interval 3600

Reviewer: Should we add a callout or section about debugging / testing? i.e. the easiest way during development to get data flowing quickly is to lower the interval.

Reviewer: `-T` is perhaps not all that useful after all -- see https://memfault.slack.com/archives/C037Z581MH9/p1661436953565099?thread_ts=1661433867.112969&cid=C037Z581MH9

Author: Added a section mentioning `collectd.interval_seconds` and restarting the service.

# Your configuration here.

Include "/tmp/collectd.conf" # Or the value of your collectd_plugin.output_file
```

If you inspect the generated `/tmp/collectd.conf` file, you'll find that it

> simply configures the `write_http` plugin to talk to Memfault.

Reviewer: Do we need to call out that data collection needs to be enabled and it will be an empty file if it's not enabled?

Author: Good point!

:::warning TODO

Specify how to configure `Interval` in conjunction with Memfault's flush
interval (TBD)

:::

> 

Reviewer: Need to call out know issues and what is off-limits:
- `PostCacheChain`: set by the generated config => if customers set it, they will need to make sure to call the memfault chain.
- There should not be a `<LoadPlugin write_http>` or `LoadPlugin write_http` in the customer's config: the generated config will load the plugin. As per the docs, subsequent `LoadPlugin` directives for the same plugin are ignored: https://collectd.org/documentation/manpages/collectd.conf.5.shtml#loadplugin_plugin
- Known issue: the `write_http` plugin is configured with `FlushInterval` and `FlushTimeout` in the generated config. Unfortunately, it is not possible to specify this parameters at a per-plugin-instance basis. If a customer is also using an instance of this plugin, that instance will also flush (perform a HTTP request) accordingly.

### Recommended configuration

See [our recommended CollectD configuration in
`meta-memfault-example`][source-recommended-collectd-conf].

This configuration makes use of standard plugins that enjoy special support on
the Memfault platform...

:::warning TODO

Specify the plugins in use (TBD)

:::

## Application metrics

> 

Reviewer: Maybe call out we'll be using statsd in the example, but there are other ways to collect application metrics as well?

Author: Hmm I thought StatsD was the Memfault-blessed way. In this doc I've presented it as an optional dependency. Should I make that a more casual recommendation and maybe link to other stuff as well?

Reviewer: I think it's fine, maybe add a sentence along these lines:

There are different ways to collect application metrics using collectd. We recommend using the statsd plugin, but other mechanisms are expected to work equally well.

```
LoadPlugin statsd
```

The [StatsD plugin][collectd-plugin-statsd] exposes a UDP port (by default
`8125`). You'll need to configure your StatsD client to talk to it. Read on to
see some examples.

### Example: using C

See [the full module in our example layer][statsd-c-example].

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <statsd-client.h>
#include <unistd.h>

#define MAX_LINE_LEN 200
#define PKT_LEN 1400

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  statsd_link *link;

  link = statsd_init_with_namespace("localhost", 8125, "mycapp");

  char pkt[PKT_LEN] = {'\0'};
  char tmp[MAX_LINE_LEN] = {'\0'};

  statsd_prepare(link, "mygauge", 42, "g", 1.0, tmp, MAX_LINE_LEN, 1);
  strncat(pkt, tmp, PKT_LEN - 1);
  statsd_send(link, pkt);

  statsd_finalize(link);
}
```

[statsd-c-example]:
  https://github.com/memfault/memfault-linux-sdk/tree/main/meta-memfault-example/recipes-memfault/statsd-sampleapp-c

### Example: using Python

See [the full module in our example layer][statsd-python-example].

```python
from statsd import StatsClient

statsd = StatsClient(
    host="localhost",
    port=8125,
    prefix="mypythonapp",
)

statsd.gauge("mygauge", 42)
```

> ## Custom Metrics on the Web App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Viewing Metrics in the Web Application
```
